The next day at dawn, Elias Smith and I left Morganton by a road
which, winding along the left bank of the Catawba River, led to the
village of Pleasant Garden. The guides accompanied us, Harry Horn, a
man of thirty, and James Bruck, aged twenty-five. They were both
natives of the region, and in constant demand among the tourists who
climbed the peaks of the Blueridge and Cumberland Mountains.

A light wagon with two good horses was provided to carry us to the
foot of the range. It contained provisions for two or three days,
beyond which our trip surely would not be protracted. Mr. Smith had
shown himself a generous provider both in meats and in liquors. As to
water the mountain springs would furnish it in abundance, increased
by the heavy rains, frequent in that region during springtime.

It is needless to add that the Mayor of Morganton in his role of
hunter, had brought along his gun and his dog, Nisko, who gamboled
joyously about the wagon. Nisko, however, was to remain behind at the
farm at Wildon, when we attempted our ascent. He could not possibly
follow us to the Great Eyrie with its cliffs to scale and its
crevasses to cross.

The day was beautiful, the fresh air in that climate is still cool of
an April morning. A few fleecy clouds sped rapidly overhead, driven
by a light breeze which swept across the long plains, from the
distant Atlantic. The sun peeping forth at intervals, illumined all
the fresh young verdure of the countryside.

An entire world animated the woods through which we passed. From
before our equipage fled squirrels, field-mice, parroquets of
brilliant colors and deafening loquacity. Opossums passed in hurried
leaps, bearing their young in their pouches. Myriads of birds were
scattered amid the foliage of banyans, palms, and masses of
rhododendrons, so luxuriant that their thickets were impenetrable.

We arrived that evening at Pleasant Garden, where we were comfortably
located for the night with the mayor of the town, a particular friend
of Mr. Smith. Pleasant Garden proved little more than a village; but
its mayor gave us a warm and generous reception, and we supped
pleasantly in his charming home, which stood beneath the shades of
some giant beech-trees.

Naturally the conversation turned upon our attempt to explore the
interior of the Great Eyrie. "You are right," said our host, "until
we all know what is hidden within there, our people will remain
uneasy."

"Has nothing new occurred," I asked, "since the last appearance of
flames above the Great Eyrie?"

"Nothing, Mr. Strock. From Pleasant Garden we can see the entire
crest of the mountain. Not a suspicious noise has come down to us.
Not a spark has risen. If a legion of devils is in hiding there, they
must have finished their infernal cookery, and soared away to some
other haunt."

"Devils!" cried Mr. Smith. "Well, I hope they have not decamped
without leaving some traces of their occupation, some parings of
hoofs or horns or tails. We shall find them out."

On the morrow, the twenty-ninth of April, we started again at dawn.
By the end of this second day, we expected to reach the farm of
Wildon at the foot of the mountain. The country was much the same as
before, except that our road led more steeply upward. Woods and
marshes alternated, though the latter grew sparser, being drained by
the sun as we approached the higher levels. The country was also less
populous. There were only a few little hamlets, almost lost beneath
the beech trees, a few lonely farms, abundantly watered by the many
streams that rushed downward toward the Catawba River.

The smaller birds and beasts grew yet more numerous. "I am much
tempted to take my gun," said Mr. Smith, "and to go off with Nisko.
This will be the first time that I have passed here without trying my
luck with the partridges and hares. The good beasts will not
recognize me. But not only have we plenty of provisions, but we have
a bigger chase on hand today. The chase of a mystery."

"And let us hope," added I, "we do not come back disappointed
hunters."

In the afternoon the whole chain of the Blueridge stretched before us
at a distance of only six miles. The mountain crests were sharply
outlined against the clear sky. Well wooded at the base, they grew
more bare and showed only stunted evergreens toward the summit. There
the scraggly trees, grotesquely twisted, gave to the rocky heights a
bleak and bizarre appearance. Here and there the ridge rose in sharp
peaks. On our right the Black Dome, nearly seven thousand feet high,
reared its gigantic head, sparkling at times above the clouds.

"Have you ever climbed that dome, Mr. Smith?" I asked.

"No," answered he, "but I am told that it is a very difficult ascent.
A few mountaineers have climbed it; but they report that it has no
outlook commanding the crater of the Great Eyrie."

"That is so," said the guide, Harry Horn. "I have tried it myself."

"Perhaps," suggested I, "the weather was unfavorable."

"On the contrary, Mr. Strock, it was unusually clear. But the wall of
the Great Eyrie on that side rose so high, it completely hid the
interior."

"Forward," cried Mr. Smith. "I shall not be sorry to set foot where
no person has ever stepped, or even looked, before."

Certainly on this day the Great Eyrie looked tranquil enough. As we
gazed upon it, there rose from its heights neither smoke nor flame.

Toward five o'clock our expedition halted at the Wildon farm, where
the tenants warmly welcomed their landlord. The farmer assured us
that nothing notable had happened about the Great Eyrie for some
time. We supped at a common table with all the people of the farm;
and our sleep that night was sound and wholly untroubled by
premonitions of the future.

On the morrow, before break of day, we set out for the ascent of the
mountain. The height of the Great Eyrie scarce exceeds five thousand
feet. A modest altitude, often surpassed in this section of the
Alleghanies. As we were already more than three thousand feet above
sea level, the fatigue of the ascent could not be great. A few hours
should suffice to bring us to the crest of the crater. Of course,
difficulties might present themselves, precipices to scale, clefts
and breaks in the ridge might necessitate painful and even dangerous
detours. This was the unknown, the spur to our attempt. As I said,
our guides knew no more than we upon this point. What made me
anxious, was, of course, the common report that the Great Eyrie was
wholly inaccessible. But this remained unproven. And then there was
the new chance that a fallen block had left a breach in the rocky
wall.

"At last," said Mr. Smith to me, after lighting the first pipe of the
twenty or more which he smoked each day, "we are well started. As to
whether the ascent will take more or less time--"

"In any case, Mr. Smith," interrupted I, "you and I are fully
resolved to pursue our quest to the end."

"Fully resolved, Mr. Strock."

"My chief has charged me to snatch the secret from this demon of the
Great Eyrie."

"We will snatch it from him, willing or unwilling," vowed Mr. Smith,
calling Heaven to witness. "Even if we have to search the very bowels
of the mountain."

"As it may happen, then," said I, "that our excursion will be
prolonged beyond today, it will be well to look to our provisions."

"Be easy, Mr. Strock; our guides have food for two days in their
knapsacks, besides what we carry ourselves. Moreover, though I left
my brave Nisko at the farm, I have my gun. Game will be plentiful in
the woods and gorges of the lower part of the mountain, and perhaps
at the top we shall find a fire to cook it, already lighted."

"Already lighted, Mr. Smith?"

"And why not, Mr. Strock? These flames! These superb flames, which
have so terrified our country folk! Is their fire absolutely cold, is
no spark to be found beneath their ashes? And then, if this is truly
a crater, is the volcano so wholly extinct that we cannot find there
a single ember? Bah! This would be but a poor volcano if it hasn't
enough fire even to cook an egg or roast a potato. Come, I repeat, we
shall see! We shall see!"

At that point of the investigation I had, I confess, no opinion
formed. I had my orders to examine the Great Eyrie. If it proved
harmless, I would announce it, and people would be reassured. But at
heart, I must admit, I had the very natural desire of a man possessed
by the demon of curiosity. I should be glad, both for my own sake,
and for the renown which would attach to my mission if the Great
Eyrie proved the center of the most remarkable phenomena--of which I
would discover the cause.

Our ascent began in this order. The two guides went in front to seek
out the most practicable paths. Elias Smith and I followed more
leisurely. We mounted by a narrow and not very steep gorge amid rocks
and trees. A tiny stream trickled downward under our feet. During the
rainy season or after a heavy shower, the water doubtless bounded
from rock to rock in tumultuous cascades. But it evidently was fed
only by the rain, for now we could scarcely trace its course. It
could not be the outlet of any lake within the Great Eyrie.

After an hour of climbing, the slope became so steep that we had to
turn, now to the right, now to the left; and our progress was much
delayed. Soon the gorge became wholly impracticable; its cliff-like
sides offered no sufficient foothold. We had to cling by branches, to
crawl upon our knees. At this rate the top would not be reached
before sundown.

"Faith!" cried Mr. Smith, stopping for breath, "I realize why the
climbers of the Great Eyrie have been few, so few, that it has never
been ascended within my knowledge."

"The fact is," I responded, "that it would be much toil for very
little profit. And if we had not special reasons to persist in our
attempt."

"You never said a truer word," declared Harry Horn. "My comrade and I
have scaled the Black Dome several times, but we never met such
obstacles as these."

"The difficulties seem almost impassable," added James Bruck.

The question now was to determine to which side we should turn for a
new route; to right, as to left, arose impenetrable masses of trees
and bushes. In truth even the scaling of cliffs would have been more
easy. Perhaps if we could get above this wooded slope we could
advance with surer foot. Now, we could only go ahead blindly, and
trust to the instincts of our two guides. James Bruck was especially
useful. I believe that that gallant lad would have equaled a monkey
in lightness and a wild goat in agility. Unfortunately, neither Elias
Smith nor I was able to climb where he could.

However, when it is a matter of real need with me, I trust I shall
never be backward, being resolute by nature and well-trained in bodily
exercise. Where James Bruck went, I was determined to go, also;
though it might cost me some uncomfortable falls. But it was not the
same with the first magistrate of Morganton, less young, less
vigorous, larger, stouter, and less persistent than we others.
Plainly he made every effort, not to retard our progress, but he
panted like a seal, and soon I insisted on his stopping to rest.

In short, it was evident that the ascent of the Great Eyrie would
require far more time than we had estimated. We had expected to reach
the foot of the rocky wall before eleven o'clock, but we now saw that
mid-day would still find us several hundred feet below it.

Toward ten o'clock, after repeated attempts to discover some more
practicable route, after numberless turnings and returnings, one of
the guides gave the signal to halt. We found ourselves at last on the
upper border of the heavy wood. The trees, more thinly spaced,
permitted us a glimpse upward to the base of the rocky wall which
constituted the true Great Eyrie.

"Whew!" exclaimed Mr. Smith, leaning against a mighty pine tree, "a
little respite, a little repose, and even a little repast would not
go badly."

"We will rest an hour," said I.

"Yes; after working our lungs and our legs, we will make our stomachs
work."

We were all agreed on this point. A rest would certainty freshen us.
Our only cause for inquietude was now the appearance of the
precipitous slope above us. We looked up toward one of those bare
strips called in that region, slides. Amid this loose earth, these
yielding stones, and these abrupt rocks there was no roadway.

Harry Horn said to his comrade, "It will not be easy."

"Perhaps impossible," responded Bruck.

Their comments caused me secret uneasiness. If I returned without
even having scaled the mountain, my mission would be a complete
failure, without speaking of the torture to my curiosity. And when I
stood again before Mr. Ward, shamed and confused, I should cut but a
sorry figure.

We opened our knapsacks and lunched moderately on bread and cold
meat. Our repast finished, in less than half an hour, Mr. Smith
sprang up eager to push forward once more. James Bruck took the lead;
and we had only to follow him as best we could.

We advanced slowly. Our guides did not attempt to conceal their doubt
and hesitation. Soon Horn left us and went far ahead to spy out which
road promised most chance of success.

Twenty minutes later he returned and led us onward toward the
northwest. It was on this side that the Black Dome rose at a distance
of three or four miles. Our path was still difficult and painful,
amid the sliding stones, held in place only occasionally by wiry
bushes. At length after a weary struggle, we gained some two
hundred feet further upward and found ourselves facing a great gash,
which, broke the earth at this spot. Here and there were scattered
roots recently uptorn, branches broken off, huge stones reduced to
powder, as if an avalanche had rushed down this flank of the mountain.

"That must be the path taken by the huge block which broke away
from the Great Eyrie," commented James Bruck.

"No doubt," answered Mr. Smith, "and I think we had better follow the
road that it has made for us."

It was indeed this gash that Harry Horn had selected for our ascent.
Our feet found lodgment in the firmer earth which had resisted the
passage of the monster rock. Our task thus became much easier, and
our progress was in a straight line upward, so that toward half past
eleven we reached the upper border of the "slide."

Before us, less than a hundred feet away, but towering a hundred feet
straight upwards in the air rose the rocky wall which formed the
final crest, the last defence of the Great Eyrie.

From this side, the summit of the wall showed capriciously irregular,
rising in rude towers and jagged needles. At one point the outline
appeared to be an enormous eagle silhouetted against the sky, just
ready to take flight. Upon this side, at least, the precipice was
insurmountable.

"Rest a minute," said Mr. Smith, "and we will see if it is possible
to make our way around the base of this cliff."

"At any rate," said Harry Horn, "the great block must have fallen
from this part of the cliff; and it has left no breach for entering."

They were both right; we must seek entrance elsewhere. After a rest
of ten minutes, we clambered up close to the foot of the wall, and
began to make a circuit of its base.

Assuredly the Great Eyrie now took on to my eyes an aspect absolutely
fantastic. Its heights seemed peopled by dragons and huge monsters.
If chimeras, griffins, and all the creations of mythology had
appeared to guard it, I should have been scarcely surprised.

With great difficulty and not without danger we continued our tour of
this circumvallation, where it seemed that nature had worked as man
does, with careful regularity. Nowhere was there any break in the
fortification; nowhere a fault in the strata by which one might
clamber up. Always this mighty wall, a hundred feet in height!

After an hour and a half of this laborious circuit, we regained our
starting-place. I could not conceal my disappointment, and Mr. Smith
was not less chagrined than I.

"A thousand devils!" cried he, "we know no better than before what is
inside this confounded Great Eyrie, nor even if it is a crater."

"Volcano, or not," said I, "there are no suspicious noises now;
neither smoke nor flame rises above it; nothing whatever threatens an
eruption."

This was true. A profound silence reigned around us; and a perfectly
clear sky shone overhead. We tasted the perfect calm of great
altitudes.

It was worth noting that the circumference of the huge wall was about
twelve or fifteen hundred feet. As to the space enclosed within, we
could scarce reckon that without knowing the thickness of the
encompassing wall. The surroundings were absolutely deserted.
Probably not a living creature ever mounted to this height, except
the few birds of prey which soared high above us.

Our watches showed three o'clock, and Mr. Smith cried in disgust,
"What is the use of stopping here all day! We shall learn nothing
more. We must make a start, Mr. Strock, if we want to get back to
Pleasant Garden to-night."

I made no answer, and did not move from where I was seated; so he
called again, "Come, Mr. Strock; you don't answer."

In truth, it cut me deeply to abandon our effort, to descend the
slope without having achieved my mission. I felt an imperious need of
persisting; my curiosity had redoubled. But what could I do? Could I
tear open this unyielding earth? Overleap the mighty cliff? Throwing
one last defiant glare at the Great Eyrie, I followed my companions.

The return was effected without great difficulty. We had only to
slide down where we had so laboriously scrambled up. Before five
o'clock we descended the last slopes of the mountain, and the farmer
of Wildon welcomed us to a much needed meal.

"Then you didn't get inside?" said he.

"No," responded Mr. Smith, "and I believe that the inside exists only
in the imagination of our country folk."

At half past eight our carriage drew up before the house of the Mayor
of Pleasant Garden, where we passed the night. While I strove vainly
to sleep, I asked myself if I should not stop there in the village
and organize a new ascent. But what better chance had it of
succeeding than the first? The wisest course was, doubtless, to
return to Washington and consult Mr. Ward.

So, the next day, having rewarded our two guides, I took leave of Mr.
Smith at Morganton, and that same evening left by train for
Washington.