At the time when the newspapers were filled with these reports, I was
again in Washington. On my return I had presented myself at my
chief's office, but had been unable to see him. Family affairs had
suddenly called him away, to be absent some weeks. Mr. Ward, however,
undoubtedly knew of the failure of my mission. The newspapers,
especially those of North Carolina, had given full details of our
ascent of the Great Eyrie.

Naturally, I was much annoyed by this delay which further fretted my
restless curiosity. I could turn to no other plans for the future.
Could I give up the hope of learning the secret of the Great Eyrie?
No! I would return to the attack a dozen times if necessary, and
despite every failure.

Surely, the winning of access within those walls was not a task
beyond human power. A scaffolding might be raised to the summit of
the cliff; or a tunnel might be pierced through its depth. Our
engineers met problems more difficult every day. But in this case it
was necessary to consider the expense, which might easily grow out of
proportion to the advantages to be gained. A tunnel would cost many
thousand dollars, and what good would it accomplish beyond satisfying
the public curiosity and my own?

My personal resources were wholly insufficient for the achievement.
Mr. Ward, who held the government's funds, was away. I even thought
of trying to interest some millionaire. Oh, if I could but have
promised one of them some gold or silver mines within the mountain!
But such an hypothesis was not admissible. The chain of the
Appalachians is not situated in a gold bearing region like that of
the Pacific mountains, the Transvaal, or Australia.

It was not until the fifteenth of June that Mr. Ward returned to
duty. Despite my lack of success he received me warmly. "Here is our
poor Strock!" cried he, at my entrance. "Our poor Strock, who has
failed!"

"No more, Mr. Ward, than if you had charged me to investigate the
surface of the moon," answered I. "We found ourselves face to face
with purely natural obstacles insurmountable with the forces then at
our command."

"I do not doubt that, Strock, I do not doubt that in the least.
Nevertheless, the fact remains that you have discovered nothing of
what is going on within the Great Eyrie."

"Nothing, Mr. Ward."

"You saw no sign of fire?"

"None."

"And you heard no suspicious noises whatever?"

"None."

"Then it is still uncertain if there is really a volcano there?"

"Still uncertain, Mr. Ward. But if it is there, we have good reason
to believe that it has sunk into a profound sleep."

"Still," returned Mr. Ward, "there is nothing to show that it will
not wake up again any day, Strock. It is not enough that a volcano
should sleep, it must be absolutely extinguished unless indeed all
these threatening rumors have been born solely in the Carolinian
imagination."

"That is not possible, sir," I said. "Both Mr. Smith, the mayor of
Morganton and his friend the mayor of Pleasant Garden, are reliable
men. And they speak from their own knowledge in this matter. Flames
have certainly risen above the Great Eyrie. Strange noises have
issued from it. There can be no doubt whatever of the reality of
these phenomena."

"Granted," declared Mr. Ward. "I admit that the evidence is
unassailable. So the deduction to be drawn is that the Great Eyrie
has not yet given up its secret."

"If we are determined to know it, Mr. Ward, the solution is only a
solution of expense. Pickaxes and dynamite would soon conquer those
walls."

"No doubt," responded the chief, "but such an undertaking hardly
seems justified, since the mountain is now quiet. We will wait awhile
and perhaps nature herself will disclose her mystery."

"Mr. Ward, believe me that I regret deeply that I have been unable to
solve the problem you entrusted to me," I said.

"Nonsense! Do not upset yourself, Strock. Take your defeat
philosophically. We cannot always be successful, even in the police.
How many criminals escape us! I believe we should never capture one
of them, if they were a little more intelligent and less imprudent,
and if they did not compromise themselves so stupidly. Nothing, it
seems to me, would be easier than to plan a crime, a theft or an
assassination, and to execute it without arousing any suspicions, or
leaving any traces to be followed. You understand, Strock, I do not
want to give our criminals lessons; I much prefer to have them remain
as they are. Nevertheless there are many whom the police will never
be able to track down."

On this matter I shared absolutely the opinion of my chief. It is
among rascals that one finds the most fools. For this very reason I
had been much surprised that none of the authorities had been able to
throw any light upon the recent performances of the "demon
automobile." And when Mr. Ward brought up this subject, I did not
conceal from him my astonishment.

He pointed out that the vehicle was practically unpursuable; that in
its earlier appearances, it had apparently vanished from all roads
even before a telephone message could be sent ahead. Active and
numerous police agents had been spread throughout the country, but no
one of them had encountered the delinquent. He did not move
continuously from place to place, even at his amazing speed, but
seemed to appear only for a moment and then to vanish into thin air.
True, he had at length remained visible along the entire route from
Prairie-du-Chien to Milwaukee, and he had covered in less than an
hour and a half this track of two hundred miles.

But since then, there had been no news whatever of the machine.
Arrived at the end of the route, driven onward by its own impetus,
unable to stop, had it indeed been engulfed within the waters of Lake
Michigan? Must we conclude that the machine and its driver had both
perished, that there was no longer any danger to be feared from
either? The great majority of the public refused to accept this
conclusion. They fully expected the machine to reappear.

Mr. Ward frankly admitted that the whole matter seemed to him most
extraordinary; and I shared his view. Assuredly if this infernal
chauffeur did not return, his apparition would have to be placed
among those superhuman mysteries which it is not given to man to
understand.

We had fully discussed this affair, the chief and I; and I thought
that our interview was at an end, when, after pacing the room for a
few moments, he said abruptly, "Yes, what happened there at Milwaukee
was very strange. But here is something no less so!"

With this he handed me a report which he had received from Boston, on
a subject of which the evening papers had just begun to apprise their
readers. While I read it, Mr. Ward was summoned from the room. I
seated myself by the window and studied with extreme attention the
matter of the report.

For some days the waters along the coast of Maine, Connecticut, and
Massachusetts had been the scene of an appearance which no one could
exactly describe. A moving body would appear amid the waters, some
two or three miles off shore, and go through rapid evolutions. It
would flash for a while back and forth among the waves and then dart
out of sight.

The body moved with such lightning speed that the best telescopes
could hardly follow it. Its length did not seem to exceed thirty
feet. Its cigar-shaped form and greenish color, made it difficult to
distinguish against the background of the ocean. It had been most
frequently observed along the coast between Cape Cod and Nova Scotia.
From Providence, from Boston, from Portsmouth, and from Portland
motor boats and steam launches had repeatedly attempted to approach
this moving body and even to give it chase. They could not get
anywhere near it. Pursuit seemed useless. It darted like an arrow
beyond the range of view.

Naturally, widely differing opinions were held as to the nature of
this object. But no hypothesis rested on any secure basis. Seamen
were as much at a loss as others. At first sailors thought it must be
some great fish, like a whale. But it is well known that all these
animals come to the surface with a certain regularity to breathe, and
spout up columns of mingled air and water. Now, this strange animal,
if it was an animal, had never "blown" as the whalers say; nor, had
it ever made any noises of breathing. Yet if it were not one of these
huge marine mammals, how was this unknown monster to be classed? Did
it belong among the legendary dwellers in the deep, the krakens, the
octopuses, the leviathans, the famous sea-serpents?

At any rate, since this monster, whatever it was, had appeared along
the New England shores, the little fishing-smacks and pleasure boats
dared not venture forth. Wherever it appeared the boats fled to the
nearest harbor, as was but prudent. If the animal was of a ferocious
character, none cared to await its attack.

As to the large ships and coast steamers, they had nothing to fear
from any monster, whale or otherwise. Several of them had seen this
creature at a distance of some miles. But when they attempted to
approach, it fled rapidly away. One day, even, a fast United States
gun boat went out from Boston, if not to pursue the monster, at least
to send after it a few cannon shot. Almost instantly the animal
disappeared, and the attempt was vain. As yet, however, the monster
had shown no intention of attacking either boats or people.

At this moment Mr. Ward returned and I interrupted my reading to say,
"There seems as yet no reason to complain of this sea-serpent. It
flees before big ships. It does not pursue little ones. Feeling and
intelligence are not very strong in fishes."

"Yet their emotions exist, Strock, and if strongly aroused--"

"But, Mr. Ward, the beast seems not at all dangerous. One of two
things will happen. Either it will presently quit these coasts, or
finally it will be captured and we shall be able to study it at our
leisure here in the museum of Washington."

"And if it is not a marine animal?" asked Mr. Ward.

"What else can it be?" I protested in surprise.

"Finish your reading," said Mr. Ward.

I did so; and found that in the second part of the report, my chief
had underlined some passages in red pencil.

For some time no one had doubted that this was an animal; and that,
if it were vigorously pursued, it would at last be driven from our
shores. But a change of opinion had come about. People began to ask
if, instead of a fish, this were not some new and remarkable kind of
boat.

Certainly in that case its engine must be one of amazing power.
Perhaps the inventor before selling the secret of his invention,
sought to attract public attention and to astound the maritime world.
Such surety in the movements of his boat, grace in its every
evolution, such ease in defying pursuit by its arrow-like speed,
surely, these were enough to arouse world-wide curiosity!

At that time great progress had been made in the manufacture of
marine engines. Huge transatlantic steamers completed the ocean
passage in five days. And the engineers had not yet spoken their last
word. Neither were the navies of the world behind. The cruisers, the
torpedo boats, the torpedo-destroyers, could match the swiftest
steamers of the Atlantic and Pacific, or of the Indian trade.

If, however, this were a boat of some new design, there had as yet
been no opportunity to observe its form. As to the engines which
drove it, they must be of a power far beyond the fastest known. By
what force they worked, was equally a problem. Since the boat had no
sails, it was not driven by the wind; and since it had no
smoke-stack, it was not driven by steam.

At this point in the report, I again paused in my reading and
considered the comment I wished to make.

"What are you puzzling over, Strock?" demanded my chief.

"It is this, Mr. Ward; the motive power of this so-called boat must
be as tremendous and as unknown as that of the remarkable automobile
which has so amazed us all."

"So that is your idea, is it, Strock?"

"Yes, Mr. Ward."

There was but one conclusion to be drawn. If the mysterious chauffeur
had disappeared, if he had perished with his machine in Lake
Michigan, it was equally important now to win the secret of this no
less mysterious navigator. And it must be won before he in his turn
plunged into the abyss of the ocean. Was it not the interest of the
inventor to disclose his invention? Would not the American government
or any other give him any price he chose to ask?

Yet unfortunately, since the inventor of the terrestrial apparition
had persisted in preserving his incognito, was it not to be feared
that the inventor of the marine apparition would equally preserve
his? Even if the first machine still existed, it was no longer heard
from; and would not the second, in the same way, after having
disclosed its powers, disappear in its turn, without a single trace?

What gave weight to this probability was that since the arrival of
this report at Washington twenty-four hours before, the presence of
the extraordinary boat hadn't been announced from anywhere along the
shore. Neither had it been seen on any other coast. Though, of
course, the assertion that it would not reappear at all would have
been hazardous, to say the least.

I noted another interesting and possibly important point. It was a
singular coincidence which indeed Mr. Ward suggested to me, at the
same moment that I was considering it. This was that only after the
disappearance of the wonderful automobile had the no less wonderful
boat come into view. Moreover, their engines both possessed a most
dangerous power of locomotion. If both should go rushing at the same
time over the face of the world, the same danger would threaten
mankind everywhere, in boats, in vehicles, and on foot. Therefore it
was absolutely necessary that the police should in some manner
interfere to protect the public ways of travel.

That is what Mr. Ward pointed out to me; and our duty was obvious.
But how could we accomplish this task? We discussed the matter for
some time; and I was just about to leave when Mr. Ward made one last
suggestion.

"Have you not observed, Strock," said he, "that there is a sort of
fantastic resemblance between the general appearance of this boat and
this automobile?"

"There is something of the sort, Mr. Ward."

"Well, is it not possible that the two are one?"