After leaving Mr. Ward I returned to my home in Long Street. There I
had plenty of time to consider this strange case uninterrupted by
either wife or children. My household consisted solely of an ancient
servant, who having been formerly in the service of my mother, had
now continued for fifteen years in mine.

Two months before I had obtained a leave of absence. It had still two
weeks to run, unless indeed some unforeseen circumstance interrupted
it, some mission which could not be delayed. This leave, as I have
shown, had already been interrupted for four days by my exploration
of the Great Eyrie.

And now was it not my duty to abandon my vacation, and endeavor to
throw light upon the remarkable events of which the road to Milwaukee
and the shore of New England had been in turn the scene? I would have
given much to solve the twin mysteries, but how was it possible to
follow the track of this automobile or this boat?

Seated in my easy chair after breakfast, with my pipe lighted, I
opened my newspaper. To what should I turn? Politics interested me
but little, with its eternal strife between the Republicans and the
Democrats. Neither did I care for the news of society, nor for the
sporting page. You will not be surprised, then, that my first idea
was to see if there was any news from North Carolina about the Great
Eyrie. There was little hope of this, however, for Mr. Smith had
promised to telegraph me at once if anything occurred. I felt quite
sure that the mayor of Morganton was as eager for information and as
watchful as could have been myself. The paper told me nothing new. It
dropped idly from my hand; and I remained deep in thought.

What most frequently recurred to me was the suggestion of Mr. Ward
that perhaps the automobile and the boat which had attracted our
attention were in reality one and the same. Very probably, at least,
the two machines had been built by the same hand. And beyond doubt,
these were similar engines, which generated this remarkable speed,
more than doubling the previous records of earth and sea.

"The same inventor!" repeated I.

Evidently this hypothesis had strong grounds. The fact that the two
machines had not yet appeared at the same time added weight to the
idea. I murmured to myself, "After the mystery of Great Eyrie, comes
that of Milwaukee and Boston. Will this new problem be as difficult
to solve as was the other?"

I noted idly that this new affair had a general resemblance to the
other, since both menaced the security of the general public. To be
sure, only the inhabitants of the Blueridge region had been in danger
from an eruption or possible earthquake at Great Eyrie. While now, on
every road of the United States, or along every league of its coasts
and harbors, every inhabitant was in danger from this vehicle or this
boat, with its sudden appearance and insane speed.

I found that, as was to be expected, the newspapers not only
suggested, but enlarged upon the dangers of the case. Timid people
everywhere were much alarmed. My old servant, naturally credulous and
superstitious, was particularly upset. That same day after dinner, as
she was clearing away the things, she stopped before me, a water
bottle in one hand, the serviette in the other, and asked anxiously,
"Is there no news, sir?"

"None," I answered, knowing well to what she referred.

"The automobile has not come back?"

"No."

"Nor the boat?"

"Nor the boat There is no news even-in the best informed papers."

"But--your secret police information?"

"We are no wiser."

"Then, sir, if you please, of what use are the police?"

It is a question which has phased me more than once.

"Now you see what will happen," continued the old housekeeper,
complainingly, "Some fine morning, he will come without warning, this
terrible chauffeur, and rush down our street here, and kill us all!"

"Good! When that happens, there will be some chance of catching him."

"He will never be arrested, sir."

"Why not?"

"Because he is the devil himself, and you can't arrest the devil!"

Decidedly, thought I, the devil has many uses; and if he did not
exist we would have to invent him, to give people some way of
explaining the inexplicable. It was he who lit the flames of the
Great Eyrie. It was he who smashed the record in the Wisconsin race.
It is he who is scurrying along the shores of Connecticut and
Massachusetts. But putting to one side this evil spirit who is so
necessary, for the convenience of the ignorant, there was no doubt
that we were facing a most bewildering problem. Had both of these
machines disappeared forever? They had passed like a meteor, like a
star shooting through space; and in a hundred years the adventure
would become a legend, much to the taste of the gossips of the next
century.

For several days the newspapers of America and even those of Europe
continued to discuss these events. Editorials crowded upon
editorials. Rumors were added to rumors. Story tellers of every kind
crowded to the front. The public of two continents was interested. In
some parts of Europe there was even jealousy that America should have
been chosen as the field of such an experience. If these marvelous
inventors were American, then their country, their army and navy,
would have a great advantage over others. The United States might
acquire an incontestable superiority.

Under the date of the tenth of June, a New York paper published a
carefully studied article on this phase of the subject. Comparing the
speed of the swiftest known vessels with the smallest minimum of
speed which could possibly be assigned to the new boat, the article
demonstrated that if the United States secured this secret, Europe
would be but three days away from her, while she would still be five
days from Europe.

If our own police had searched diligently to discover the mystery of
the Great Eyrie, the secret service of every country in the world was
now interested in these new problems.

Mr. Ward referred to the matter each time I saw him. Our chat would
begin by his rallying me about my ill-success in Carolina, and I
would respond by reminding him that success there was only a question
of expense.

"Never mind, my good Strock," said he, "there will come a chance for
our clever inspector to regain his laurels. Take now this affair of
the automobile and the boat. If you could clear that up in advance of
all the detectives of the world, what an honor it would be to our
department! What glory for you!"

"It certainly would, Mr. Ward. And if you put the matter in my
charge--"

"Who knows, Strock? Let us wait a while! Let us wait!"

Matters stood thus when, on the morning of June fifteenth, my old
servant brought me a letter from the letter-carrier, a registered
letter for which I had to sign. I looked at the address. I did not
know the handwriting. The postmark, dating from two days before, was
stamped at the post office of Morganton.

Morganton! Here at last was, no doubt, news from Mr. Elias Smith.

"Yes!" exclaimed I, speaking to my old servant, for lack of another,
"it must be from Mr. Smith at last. I know no one else in Morganton.
And if he writes he has news!"

"Morganton?" said the old woman, "isn't that the place where the
demons set fire to their mountain?"

"Exactly."

"Oh, sir! I hope you don't mean to go back there!"

"Because you will end by being burned up in that furnace of the Great
Eyrie. And I wouldn't want you buried that way, sir."

"Cheer up, and let us see if it is not better news than that."

The envelope was sealed with red sealing wax, and stamped with a sort
of coat of arms, surmounted with three stars. The paper was thick and
very strong. I broke the envelope and drew out a letter. It was a
single sheet, folded in four, and written on one side only. My first
glance was for the signature.

There was no signature! Nothing but three initials at the end of the
last line!

"The letter is not from the Mayor of Morganton," said I.

"Then from whom?" asked the old servant, doubly curious in her
quality as a woman and as an old gossip.

Looking again at the three initials of the signature, I said, "I know
no one for whom these letters would stand; neither at Morganton nor
elsewhere."

The hand-writing was bold. Both up strokes and down strokes very
sharp, about twenty lines in all. Here is the letter, of which I,
with good reason, retained an exact copy. It was dated, to my extreme
stupefaction, from that mysterious Great Eyrie:


Great Eyrie, Blueridge Mtns,

To Mr. Strock: North Carolina, June 13th.

Chief Inspector of Police,

34 Long St., Washington, D. C.

Sir,

You were charged with the mission of penetrating the Great Eyrie.

You came on April the twenty-eighth, accompanied by the
Mayor of Morganton and two guides.

You mounted to the foot of the wall, and you encircled it,
finding it too high and steep to climb.

You sought a breech and you found none. Know this: none
enter the Great Eyrie; or if one enters, he never returns.

"Do not try again, for the second attempt will not result
as did the first, but will have grave consequences for you.

"Heed this warning, or evil fortune will come to you.

"M. o. W."