I confess that at first this letter dumfounded me. "Ohs!" and "Ahs!"
slipped from my open mouth. The old servant stared at me, not knowing
what to think.

"Oh, sir! is it bad news?"

I answered for I kept few secrets from this faithful soul by reading
her the letter from end to end. She listened with much anxiety.

"A joke, without doubt," said I, shrugging my shoulders.

"Well," returned my superstitious handmaid, "if it isn't from the
devil, it's from the devil's country, anyway."

Left alone, I again went over this unexpected letter. Reflection
inclined me yet more strongly to believe that it was the work of a
practical joker. My adventure was well known. The newspapers had
given it in full detail. Some satirist, such as exists even in
America, must have written this threatening letter to mock me.

To assume, on the other hand, that the Eyrie really served as the
refuge of a band of criminals, seemed absurd. If they feared that the
police would discover their retreat, surely they would not have been
so foolish as thus to force attention upon themselves. Their chief
security would lie in keeping their presence there unknown. They must
have realized that such a challenge from them would only arouse the
police to renewed activity. Dynamite or melinite would soon open an
entrance to their fortress. Moreover, how could these men have,
themselves, gained entrance into the Eyrie unless there existed a
passage which we had failed to discover? Assuredly the letter came
from a jester or a madman; and I need not worry over it, nor even
consider it.

Hence, though for an instant I had thought of showing this letter to
Mr. Ward, I decided not to do so. Surely he would attach no
importance to it. However, I did not destroy it, but locked it in my
desk for safe keeping. If more letters came of the same kind, and
with the same initials, I would attach as little weight to them as to
this.

Several days passed quietly. There was nothing to lead me to expect
that I should soon quit Washington; though in my line of duty one is
never certain of the morrow. At any moment I might be sent speeding
from Oregon to Florida, from Maine to Texas. And this unpleasant
thought haunted me frequently if my next mission were no more
successful than that to the Great Eyrie, I might as well give up and
hand in my resignation from the force. Of the mysterious chauffeur or
chauffeurs, nothing more was heard. I knew that our own government
agents, as well as foreign ones, were keeping keen watch over all the
roads and rivers, all the lakes and the coasts of America. Of course,
the size of the country made any close supervision impossible; but
these twin inventors had not before chosen secluded and unfrequented
spots in which to appear. The main highway of Wisconsin on a great
race day, the harbor of Boston, incessantly crossed by thousands of
boats, these were hardly what would be called hiding-places! If the
daring driver had not perished of which there was always strong
probability; then he must have left America. Perhaps he was in the
waters of the Old World, or else resting in some retreat known only
to himself, and in that case--

"Ah!" I repeated to myself, many times, "for such a retreat, as
secret as inaccessible, this fantastic personage could not find one
better than the Great Eyrie!" But, of course, a boat could not get
there, any more than an automobile. Only high-flying birds of prey,
eagles or condors, could find refuge there.

The nineteenth of June I was going to the police bureau, when, on
leaving my house, I noticed two men who looked at me with a certain
keenness. Not knowing them, I took no notice; and if my attention was
drawn to the matter, it was because my servant spoke of it when I
returned.

For some days, she said, she had noticed that two men seemed to be
spying upon me in the street. They stood constantly, perhaps a
hundred steps from my house; and she suspected that they followed me
each time I went up the street.

"You are sure?" I asked.

"Yes, sir and no longer ago than yesterday, when you came into the
house, these men came slipping along in your footsteps, and then went
away as soon as the door was shut behind you."

"You must be mistaken?"

"I am not, sir."

"And if you met these two men, you would know them?"

"I would."

"Good;" I cried, laughing, "I see you have the very spirit for a
detective. I must engage you as a member of our force."

"Joke if you like, sir. But I have still two good eyes, and I don't
need spectacles to recognize people. Someone is spying on you, that's
certain; and you should put some of your men to track them in turn."

"All right; I promise to do so," I said, to satisfy her. "And when my
men get after them, we shall soon know what these mysterious fellows
want of me."

In truth I did not take the good soul's excited announcement very
seriously. I added, however, "When I go out, I will watch the people
around me with great care."

"That will be best, sir."

My poor old housekeeper was always frightening herself at nothing.
"If I see them again," she added, "I will warn you before you set
foot out of doors."

"Agreed!" And I broke off the conversation, knowing well that if I
allowed her to run on, she would end by being sure that Beelzebub
himself and one of his chief attendants were at my heels.

The two following days, there was certainly no one spying on me,
either at my exits or entrances. So I concluded my old servant had
made much of nothing, as usual. But on the morning of the
twenty-second of June, after rushing upstairs as rapidly as her age
would permit, the devoted old soul burst into my room and in a half
whisper gasped "Sir! Sir!"

"What is it?"

"They are there!"

"Who?" I queried, my mind on anything but the web she had been
spinning about me.

"The two spies!"

"Ah, those wonderful spies!"

"Themselves! In the street! Right in front of our windows! Watching
the house, waiting for you to go out."

I went to the window and raising just an edge of the shade, so as not
to give any warning, I saw two men on the pavement.

They were rather fine-looking men, broad-shouldered and vigorous,
aged somewhat under forty, dressed in the ordinary fashion of the
day, with slouched hats, heavy woolen suits, stout walking shoes and
sticks in hand. Undoubtedly, they were staring persistently at my
apparently unwatchful house. Then, having exchanged a few words, they
strolled off a little way, and returned again.

"Are you sure these are the same men you saw before?"

"Yes, sir."

Evidently, I could no longer dismiss her warning as an hallucination;
and I promised myself to clear up the matter. As to following the men
myself, I was presumably too well known to them. To address them
directly would probably be of no use. But that very day, one of our
best men should be put on watch, and if the spies returned on the
morrow, they should be tracked in their turn, and watched until their
identity was established.

At the moment, they were waiting to follow me to police headquarters?
For it was there that I was bound, as usual. If they accompanied me I
might be able to offer them a hospitality for which they would scarce
thank me.

I took my hat; and while the housekeeper remained peeping from the
window, I went down stairs, opened the door, and stepped into the
street.

The two men were no longer there.

Despite all my watchfulness, that day I saw no more of them as I
passed along the streets. From that time on, indeed, neither my old
servant nor I saw them again before the house, nor did I encounter
them elsewhere. Their appearance, however, was stamped upon my
memory, I would not forget them.

Perhaps after all, admitting that I had been the object of their
espionage, they had been mistaken in my identity. Having obtained a
good look at me, they now followed me no more. So in the end, I came
to regard this matter as of no more importance than the letter with
the initials, M. o. W.

Then, on the twenty-fourth of June, there came a new event, to
further stimulate both my interest and that of the general public in
the previous mysteries of the automobile and the boat. The Washington
Evening Star published the following account, which was next morning
copied by every paper in the country.

"Lake Kirdall in Kansas, forty miles west of Topeka, is little known.
It deserves wider knowledge, and doubtless will have it hereafter,
for attention is now drawn to it in a very remarkable way.

"This lake, deep among the mountains, appears to have no outlet. What
it loses by evaporation, it regains from the little neighboring
streamlets and the heavy rains.

"Lake Kirdall covers about seventy-five square miles, and its level
is but slightly below that of the heights which surround it. Shut in
among the mountains, it can be reached only by narrow and rocky
gorges. Several villages, however, have sprung up upon its banks. It
is full of fish, and fishing-boats cover its waters.

"Lake Kirdall is in many places fifty feet deep close to shore.
Sharp, pointed rocks form the edges of this huge basin. Its surges,
roused by high winds, beat upon its banks with fury, and the houses
near at hand are often deluged with spray as if with the downpour of
a hurricane. The lake, already deep at the edge, becomes yet deeper
toward the center, where in some places soundings show over three
hundred feet of water.

"The fishing industry supports a population of several thousands, and
there are several hundred fishing boats in addition to the dozen or
so of little steamers which serve the traffic of the lake. Beyond the
circle of the mountains lie the railroads which transport the
products of the fishing industry throughout Kansas and the
neighboring states.

"This account of Lake Kirdall is necessary for the understanding of
the remarkable facts which we are about to report."

And this is what the Evening Star then reported in its startling
article. "For some time past, the fishermen have noticed a strange
upheaval in the waters of the lake. Sometimes it rises as if a wave
surged up from its depths. Even in perfectly calm weather, when there
is no wind whatever, this upheaval sometimes arises in a mass of foam.

"Tossed about by violent waves and unaccountable currents, boats have
been swept beyond all control. Sometimes they have been dashed one
against another, and serious damage has resulted.

"This confusion of the waters evidently has its origin somewhere in
the depths of the lake; and various explanations have been offered to
account for it. At first, it was suggested that the trouble was due
to seismic forces, to some volcanic action beneath the lake; but this
hypothesis had to be rejected when it was recognized that the
disturbance was not confined to one locality, but spread itself over
the entire surface of the lake, either at one part or another, in the
center or along the edges, traveling along almost in a regular line
and in a way to exclude entirely all idea of earthquake or volcanic
action.

"Another hypothesis suggested that it was a marine monster who thus
upheaved the waters. But unless the beast had been born in the lake
and had there grown to its gigantic proportions unsuspected, which
was scarce possible, he must have come there from outside. Lake
Kirdall, however, has no connection with any other waters. If this
lake were situated near any of the oceans, there might be
subterranean canals; but in the center of America, and at the height
of some thousands of feet above sea-level, this is not possible. In
short, here is another riddle not easy to solve, and it is much
easier to point out the impossibility of false explanations, than to
discover the true one.

"Is it possible that a submarine boat is being experimented with
beneath the lake? Such boats are no longer impossible today. Some
years ago, at Bridgeport, Connecticut, there was launched a boat, The
Protector, which could go on the water, under the water, and also
upon land. Built by an inventor named Lake, supplied with two motors,
an electric one of seventy-five horse power, and a gasoline one of
two hundred and fifty horse power, it was also provided with wheels a
yard in diameter, which enabled it to roll over the roads, as well as
swim the seas.

"But even then, granting that the turmoil of Lake Kirdall might be
produced by a submarine, brought to a high degree of perfection,
there remains as before the question how could it have reached Lake
Kirdall? The lake, shut in on all sides by a circle of mountains, is
no more accessible to a submarine than to a sea-monster.

"In whatever way this last puzzling question may be solved, the
nature of this strange appearance can no longer be disputed since the
twentieth of June. On that day, in the afternoon, the schooner
"Markel" while speeding with all sails set, came into violent
collision with something just below the water level. There was no
shoal nor rock near; for the lake in this part is eighty or ninety
feet deep. The schooner with both her bow and her side badly broken,
ran great danger of sinking. She managed, however, to reach the shore
before her decks were completely submerged.

"When the 'Markel' had been pumped out and hauled up on shore, an
examination showed that she had received a blow near the bow as if
from a powerful ram.

"From this it seems evident that there is actually a submarine boat
which darts about beneath the surface of Lake Kirdall with most
remarkable rapidity.

"The thing is difficult to explain. Not only is there a question as
to how did the submarine get there? But why is it there? Why does it
never come to the surface? What reason has its owner for remaining
unknown? Are other disasters to be expected from its reckless course?"

The article in the Evening Star closed with this truly striking
suggestion: "After the mysterious automobile, came the mysterious
boat. Now comes the mysterious submarine.

"Must we conclude that the three engines are due to the genius of the
same inventor, and that the three vehicles are in truth but one?"