So the undiscoverable commander had reappeared upon the territory of
the United States! He had never shown himself in Europe either on the
roads or in the seas. He had not crossed the Atlantic, which
apparently he could have traversed in three days. Did he then intend
to make only America the scene of his exploits? Ought we to conclude
from this that he was an American?

Let me insist upon this point. It seemed clear that the submarine
might easily have crossed the vast sea which separates the New and
the Old World. Not only would its amazing speed have made its voyage
short, in comparison to that of the swiftest steamship, but also it
would have escaped all the storms that make the voyage dangerous.
Tempests did not exist for it. It had but to abandon the surface of
the waves, and it could find absolute calm a few score feet beneath.

But the inventor had not crossed the Atlantic, and if he were to be
captured now, it would probably be in Ohio, since Toledo is a city of
that state.

This time the fact of the machine's appearance had been kept secret,
between the police and the agent who had warned them, and whom I was
hurrying to meet. No journal--and many would have paid high for the
chance--was printing this news. We had decided that nothing should
be revealed until our effort was at an end. No indiscretion would be
committed by either my comrades or myself.

The man to whom I was sent with an order from Mr. Ward was named
Arthur Wells. He awaited us at Toledo. The city of Toledo stands at
the western end of Lake Erie. Our train sped during the night across
West Virginia and Ohio. There was no delay; and before noon the next
day the locomotive stopped in the Toledo depot.

John Hart, Nab Walker and I stepped out with traveling bags in our
hands, and revolvers in our pockets. Perhaps we should need weapons
for an attack, or even to defend ourselves. Scarcely had I stepped
from the train when I picked out the man who awaited us. He was
scanning the arriving passengers impatiently, evidently as eager and
full of haste as I.

I approached him. "Mr. Wells?" said I.

"Mr. Strock?" asked he.

"Yes."

"I am at your command," said Mr. Wells.

"Are we to stop any time in Toledo?" I asked.

"No; with your permission, Mr. Strock. A carriage with two good
horses is waiting outside the station; and we must leave at once to
reach our destination as soon as possible."

"We will go at once," I answered, signing to my two men to follow us.
"Is it far?"

"Twenty miles."

"And the place is called?"

"Black Rock Creek."

Having left our bags at a hotel, we started on our drive. Much to my
surprise I found there were provisions sufficient for several days
packed beneath the seat of the carriage. Mr. Wells told me that the
region around Black Rock Creek was among the wildest in the state.
There was nothing there to attract either farmers or fishermen. We
would find not an inn for our meals nor a room in which to sleep.
Fortunately, during the July heat there would be no hardship even if
we had to lie one or two nights under the stars.

More probably, however, if we were successful, the matter would not
occupy us many hours. Either the commander of the "Terror" would be
surprised before he had a chance to escape, or he would take to
flight and we must give up all hope of arresting him.

I found Arthur Wells to be a man of about forty, large and powerful.
I knew him by reputation to be one of the best of our local police
agents. Cool in danger and enterprising always, he had proven his
daring on more than one occasion at the peril of his life. He had
been in Toledo on a wholly different mission, when chance had thrown
him on the track of the "Terror."

We drove rapidly along the shore of Lake Erie, toward the southwest.
This inland sea of water is on the northern boundary of the United
States, lying between Canada on one side and the States of Ohio,
Pennsylvania and New York on the other. If I stop to mention the
geographical position of this lake, its depth, its extent, and the
waters nearest around, it is because the knowledge is necessary for
the understanding of the events which were about to happen.

The surface of Lake Erie covers about ten thousand square miles. It
is nearly six hundred feet above sea level. It is joined on the
northwest, by means of the Detroit River, with the still greater
lakes to the westward, and receives their waters. It has also rivers
of its own though of less importance, such as the Rocky, the
Cuyahoga, and the Black. The lake empties at its northeastern end
into Lake Ontario by means of Niagara River and its celebrated falls.

The greatest known depth of Lake Erie is over one hundred and thirty
feet. Hence it will be seen that the mass of its waters is
considerable. In short, this is a region of most magnificent lakes.
The land, though not situated far northward, is exposed to the full
sweep of the Arctic cold. The region to the northward is low, and the
winds of winter rush down with extreme violence. Hence Lake Erie is
sometimes frozen over from shore to shore.

The principal cities on the borders of this great lake are Buffalo at
the east, which belongs to New York State, and Toledo in Ohio, at the
west, with Cleveland and Sandusky, both Ohio cities, at the south.
Smaller towns and villages are numerous along the shore. The traffic
is naturally large, its annual value being estimated at considerably
over two million dollars.

Our carriage followed a rough and little used road along the borders
of the lake; and as we toiled along, Arthur Wells told me, what he
had learned.

Less than two days before, on the afternoon of July twenty-seventh
Wells had been riding on horseback toward the town of Herly. Five
miles outside the town, he was riding through a little wood, when he
saw, far up across the lake, a submarine which rose suddenly above
the waves. He stopped, tied his horse, and stole on foot to the edge
of the lake. There, from behind a tree he had seen with his own eyes
seen this submarine advance toward him, and stop at the mouth of
Black Rock Creek. Was it the famous machine for which the whole world
was seeking, which thus came directly to his feet?

When the submarine was close to the rocks, two men climbed out upon
its deck and stepped ashore. Was one of them this Master of the
World, who had not been seen since he was reported from Lake
Superior? Was this the mysterious "Terror" which had thus risen from
the depths of Lake Erie?

"I was alone," said Wells. "Alone on the edge of the Creek. If you
and your assistants, Mr. Strock had been there, we four against two,
we would have been able to reach these men and seize them before they
could have regained their boat and fled."

"Probably," I answered. "But were there no others on the boat with
them? Still, if we had seized the two, we could at least have learned
who they were."

"And above all," added Wells, "if one of them turned out to be the
captain of the 'Terror!'"

"I have only one fear, Wells; this submarine, whether it is the one
we seek or another, may have left the creek since your departure."

"We shall know about that in a few hours, now. Pray Heaven they are
still there! Then when night comes?"

"But," I asked, "did you remain watching in the wood until night?"

"No; I left after an hour's watching, and rode straight for the
telegraph station at Toledo. I reached there late at night and sent
immediate word to Washington."

"That was night before last. Did you return yesterday to Black Rock
Creek?"

"Yes."

"The submarine was still there?"

"In the same spot."

"And the two men?"

"The same two men. I judge that some accident had happened, and they
came to this lonely spot to repair it."

"Probably so," said I. "Some damage which made it impossible for them
to regain their usual hiding-place. If only they are still here!"

"I have reason to believe they will be, for quite a lot of stuff was
taken out of the boat, and laid about upon the shore; and as well as
I could discern from a distance they seemed to be working on board."

"Only the two men?"

"Only the two."

"But," protested I, "can two be sufficient to handle an apparatus of
such speed, and of such intricacy, as to be at once automobile, boat
and submarine?"

"I think not, Mr. Strock; but I only saw the same two. Several times
they came to the edge of the little wood where I was hidden, and
gathered sticks for a fire which they made upon the beach. The region
is so uninhabited and the creek so hidden from the lake that they ran
little danger of discovery. They seemed to know this."

"You would recognize them both again?"

"Perfectly. One was of middle size, vigorous, and quick of movement,
heavily bearded. The other was smaller, but stocky and strong.
Yesterday, as before, I left the wood about five o'clock and hurried
back to Toledo. There I found a telegram from Mr. Ward, notifying me
of your coming; and I awaited you at the station."

Summed up, then, the news amounted to this: For forty hours past a
submarine, presumably the one we sought, had been hidden in Black
Rock Creek, engaged in repairs. Probably these were absolutely
necessary, and we should find the boat still there. As to how the
"Terror" came to be in Lake Erie, Arthur Wells and I discussed that,
and agreed that it was a very probable place for her. The last time
she had been seen was on Lake Superior. From there to Lake Erie the
machine could have come by the roads of Michigan, but since no one
had remarked its passage and as both the police and the people were
specially aroused and active in that portion of the country, it
seemed more probable, that the "Terror" had come by water. There was
a clear route through the chain of the Great Lakes and their rivers,
by which in her character of a submarine she could easily proceed
undiscovered.

And now, if the "Terror" had already left the creek, or if she
escaped when we attempted to seize her, in what direction would she
turn? In any case, there was little chance o following her. There
were two torpedo-destroyers at the port of Buffalo, at the other
extremity of Lake Erie. By treaty between the United States and
Canada, there are no vessels of war whatever on the Great Lakes.
These might, however, have been little launches belonging to the
customs service. Before I left Washington Mr. Ward had informed me
of their presence; and a telegram to their commanders would, if there
were need, start them in pursuit of the "Terror." But despite their
splendid speed, how could they vie with her! And if she plunged
beneath the waters, they would be helpless. Moreover Arthur Wells
averred that in case of a battle, the advantage would not be with the
destroyers, despite their large crews, and many guns. Hence, if we
did not succeed this night, the campaign would end in failure.

Arthur Wells knew Black Rock Creek thoroughly, having hunted there
more than once. It was bordered in most places with sharp rocks
against which the waters of the lake beat heavily. Its channel was
some thirty feet deep, so that the "Terror" could take shelter either
upon the surface or under water. In two or three places the steep
banks gave way to sand beaches which led to little gorges reaching up
toward the woods, two or three hundred feet.

It was seven in the evening when our carriage reached these woods.
There was still daylight enough for us to see easily, even in the
shade of the trees. To have crossed openly to the edge of the creek
would have exposed us to the view of the men of the "Terror," if she
were still there, and thus give her warning to escape.

"Had we better stop here?" I asked Wells, as our rig drew up to the
edge of the woods.

"No, Mr. Strock," said he. "We had better leave the carriage deeper
in the woods, where there will be no chance whatever of our being
seen."

"Can the carriage drive under these trees?"

"It can," declared Wells. "I have already explored these woods
thoroughly. Five or six hundred feet from here, there is a little
clearing, where we will be completely hidden, and where our horses
may find pasture. Then, as soon as it is dark, we will go down to the
beach, at the edge of the rocks which shut in the mouth of the creek.
Thus if the 'Terror' is still there, we shall stand between her and
escape."

Eager as we all were for action, it was evidently best to do as Wells
suggested and wait for night. The intervening time could well be
occupied as he said. Leading the horses by the bridle, while they
dragged the empty carriage, we proceeded through the heavy woods. The
tall pines, the stalwart oaks, the cypress scattered here and there,
made the evening darker overhead. Beneath our feet spread a carpet of
scattered herbs, pine needles and dead leaves. Such was the thickness
of the upper foliage that the last rays of the setting sun could no
longer penetrate here. We had to feel our way; and it was not without
some knocks that the carriage reached the clearing ten minutes later.

This clearing, surrounded by great trees, formed a sort of oval,
covered with rich grass. Here it was still daylight, and the darkness
would scarcely deepen for over an hour. There was thus time to
arrange an encampment and to rest awhile after our hard trip over the
rough and rocky roads.

Of course, we were intensely eager to approach the Creek and see if
the "Terror" was still there. But prudence restrained us. A little
patience, and the night-would enable us to reach a commanding
position unsuspected. Wells urged this strongly; and despite my
eagerness, I felt that he was right.

The horses were unharnessed, and left to browse under the care of the
coachman who had driven us. The provisions were unpacked, and John
Hart and Nab Walker spread out a meal on the grass at the foot of a
superb cypress which recalled to me the forest odors of Morganton and
Pleasant Garden. We were hungry and thirsty; and food and drink were
not lacking. Then our pipes were lighted to calm the anxious moments
of waiting that remained.

Silence reigned within the wood. The last song of the birds had
ceased. With the coming of night the breeze fell little by little,
and the leaves scarcely quivered even at the tops of the highest
branches. The sky darkened rapidly after sundown and twilight
deepened into obscurity.

I looked at my watch, it was half-past eight. "It is time, Wells."

"When you will, Mr. Strock."

"Then let us start."

We cautioned the coachman not to let the horses stray beyond the
clearing. Then we started. Wells went in advance, I followed him, and
John Hart and Nab Walker came behind. In the darkness, we three would
have been helpless without the guidance of Wells. Soon we reached the
farther border of the woods; and before us stretched the banks of
Black Rock Creek.

All was silent; all seemed deserted. We could advance without risk.
If the "Terror" was there, she had cast anchor behind the rocks. But
was she there? That was the momentous question! As we approached the
denouement of this exciting affair, my heart was in my throat.

Wells motioned to us to advance. The sand of the shore crunched
beneath our steps. The two hundred feet between us and the mouth of
the Creek were crossed softly, and a few minutes sufficed to bring us
to the rocks at the edge of the lake.

There was nothing! Nothing!

The spot where Wells had left the "Terror" twenty-four hours before
was empty. The "Master of the World" was no longer at Black Rock
Creek.
